---
layout: post
title: Node.js
category: tutorials
---

In this tutorial, we will cover how to deploy a simple "Hello World"
Node.js application.

## Prerequisites

* Basic Node.js knowledge
* Node.js 0.6 already installed
* Basic knowledge of Git, or Mercurial if you wish to use Mercurial

## Create Your Application

{% highlight bash %}
$ mkdir node-hello
$ cd node-hello
{% endhighlight %}

Create an `app.js` file which will be your main entry point. By default,
PaaS.io will look for an `app.js` or `server.js` file.

{% highlight javascript %}
var app = require('express').createServer();

app.get('/', function(req, res) {
  res.send('Hello, World');
});

app.listen(process.env.VCAP_APP_PORT || 3000);
{% endhighlight %}

The port which the application is supposed to be listening on is passed
using the `VCAP_APP_PORT` environment variable. If this port isn't bound
to on startup, it will assume the application failed to start and
terminate it.

This app makes use of the `express` module, so we need to install that
locally with `npm` to test it out.

{% highlight bash %}
$ npm install express
{% endhighlight %}

This will create the `node_modules` directory. Currently, we don't
install modules that are specified in a `packages.json` file, so the
modules directory must be commited to source control and deployed.

If we want to run our application locally, can just call `node app.js`
and it will start up and be listening on port 3000.

## Adding to Source Control

If using Git, you can now create a repository:

{% highlight bash %}
$ git init
$ git add .
$ git commit -m "Initial Commit"
{% endhighlight %}

## Deploying Your Application

If you don't have it already, would recommend installing the PaaS.io
command line tool:

{% highlight bash %}
$ gem install paasio
{% endhighlight %}

To create your application, use `paasio create`

{% highlight bash %}
$ paasio create node-hello
Application Deployed URL [node-hello.paas.io]:
Detected a Node.js Application, is this correct? [Yn]:
Memory Reservation (256M, 512M, 1G, 2G) [256M]:
Creating Application: OK
Git remote paasio added
{% endhighlight %}

Since it saw we were using a Git
repository, it automatically added a `paasio` remote to our repository:

{% highlight bash %}
$ git remote show paasio
* remote paasio
  Fetch URL: deploy@paas.io:node-hello.git
  Push  URL: deploy@paas.io:node-hello.git
  HEAD branch: (unknown)
{% endhighlight %}

The HEAD branch portion says "(unknown)" because we haven't yet pushed
anything to it.

Now we're ready to deploy it.

{% highlight bash %}
$ git push -u paasio master
Counting objects: 63, done.
Delta compression using up to 8 threads.
Compressing objects: 100% (48/48), done.
Writing objects: 100% (63/63), 25.21 KiB, done.
Total 63 (delta 2), reused 0 (delta 0)
remote: Checking out code: OK
remote:
remote: Uploading Application:
remote:   Checking for available resources: OK
remote:   Packing application: OK
remote:   Uploading (12K): Push Status: OK
remote: Staging Application 'node-hello': OK
remote: Starting Application 'node-hello': OK
To deploy@paas.io:node-hello.git
 * [new branch]      master -> master
Branch master set up to track remote branch master from paasio.
{% endhighlight %}

We specify the `-u` parameter in the push command because this sets up
tracking in Git. With that, when you run `git status`, it will show you
how many commits haven't been pushed to PaaS.io yet.

Your application is now live! We can test it out with a simple `curl`
command:

{% highlight bash %}
$ curl http://node-hello.paas.io
Hello, World
{% endhighlight %}


