---
layout: post
title: Ruby - Rack
category: tutorials
---

In this tutorial, we will cover how to deploy a basic Hello World
Rack application using Sinatra to PaaS.io.

Please note that this tutorial has a lot in common with the Sinatra
tutorial, however by a Rack application loads based on the `config.ru`
file while the Sinatra application type targets the file which contains
the line `require 'sinatra'`.

## Prerequisites

* Basic Ruby knowledge, including Bundler
* Ruby already installed
* Basic knowledge of Git, or Mercurial if you wish to use Mercurial

## Create Your Application

{% highlight bash %}
$ mkdir myapp
$ cd myapp
{% endhighlight %}

#### Gemfile

In your Gemfile, add the following entries:

{% highlight ruby %}
source :rubygems
gem 'sinatra'
gem 'thin'
{% endhighlight %}

After creating the Gemfile, be sure to run `bundle install` to install
the gems and to generate the `Gemfile.lock` file.

It is necessary to specify `thin` in the Gemfile or else the application
will be started using WebBrick instead.

#### Main Application

Create a file called `hello.rb` containing the following:

{% highlight ruby %}
require 'bundler'
Bundler.require

get '/' do
   "Hello from PaaS.io"
end
{% endhighlight %}

In comparison to the Sinatra tutorial, now we're simply using
`Bundler.require` to load all the necessary gems.

#### The Rackup File (config.ru)

And finally, we create the rackup file (`config.ru`) which specifies how
to start up the application.

{% highlight ruby %}
require './hello'
run Sinatra::Application
{% endhighlight %}

In this case, it simply loads the `hello.rb` file and then calls to
`Sinatra::Application` as the main rack application to run.

## Adding to Source Control

If using Git, you can now create a repository:

{% highlight bash %}
$ git init
$ git add .
$ git commit -m "Initial Commit"
{% endhighlight %}

## Deploying Your Application

If you don't have it already, would recommend installing the PaaS.io
command line tool:

{% highlight bash %}
$ gem install paasio
{% endhighlight %}

To create your application, use `paasio create`

{% highlight bash %}
$ paasio create my-rack-app
Using application name "my-rack-app"...
Application Deployed URL [my-rack-app.paas.io]:
Detected a Rack Application, is this correct? [Yn]:
Memory Reservation (256M, 512M, 1G, 2G) [256M]:
Creating Application: OK
Git remote paasio added
{% endhighlight %}

Since it saw we were using a Git
repository, it automatically added a `paasio` remote to our repository:

{% highlight bash %}
$ git remote show paasio
* remote paasio
  Fetch URL: deploy@paas.io:my-rack-app.git
  Push  URL: deploy@paas.io:my-rack-app.git
  HEAD branch: (unknown)
{% endhighlight %}

The HEAD branch portion says "(unknown)" because we haven't yet pushed
anything to it.

Now we're ready to deploy it.

{% highlight bash %}
$ git push -u paasio master
Counting objects: 63, done.
Delta compression using up to 8 threads.
Compressing objects: 100% (48/48), done.
Writing objects: 100% (63/63), 25.21 KiB, done.
Total 63 (delta 2), reused 0 (delta 0)
remote: Checking out code: OK
remote:
remote: Uploading Application:
remote:   Checking for available resources: OK
remote:   Packing application: OK
remote:   Uploading (4K): Push Status: OK
remote: Staging Application 'my-rack-app': OK
remote: Starting Application 'my-rack-app': OK
To deploy@paas.io:my-rack-app.git
 * [new branch]      master -> master
Branch master set up to track remote branch master from paasio.
{% endhighlight %}

Your application is now live! When deploying, it may sit at the "Staging
Application" stage for a little while at first.  It is working on
installing all of the necessary gems. On future deploys, it will be much
quicker since it will cache compiled gems for future use.

We specify the `-u` parameter in the push command because this sets up
tracking in Git. With that, when you run `git status`, it will show you
how many commits haven't been pushed to PaaS.io yet.

#### Verifying it is live

We can test it out with a simple `curl` command:

{% highlight bash %}
$ curl http://my-rack-app.paas.io
Hello from PaaS.io
{% endhighlight %}

